[WIP] Version 1.10. Release Article (#992)
qdrant/landing_page: qdrant-landing/content/blog/qdrant-1.10.x.md

---
title: "Qdrant 1.10 - Universal Query, BM42 & ColBERT Support"
draft: false
short_description: "Single search API. New search algorithm. Native multivector support."
description: "Consolidated search API, brand new BM42 algorithm, and native multivector support. " 
preview_image: /blog/qdrant-1.10.x/social_preview.png
social_preview_image: /blog/qdrant-1.10.x/social_preview.png
date: 2024-06-25T00:00:00-08:00
author: David Myriel
featured: false 
tags:
  - vector search
  - ColBERT late interaction
  - BM25 algorithm
  - search API
  - new features
---

[Qdrant 1.10.0 is out!](https://github.com/qdrant/qdrant/releases/tag/v1.10.0) This version introduces at some major changes, so let's dive right in:

**Universal Query API:** All search APIs are now consolidated into the single Query API endpoint.</br>
**Hybrid Search:** Hybrid Search is offered out of the box, and you can use it via Query API.</br>
**BM42 Algorithm:** Alternative method of scoring is best suited for Hybrid Search on short docs.</br>
**Multivector Support:** Native support for late interaction ColBERT is accessible via Query API.

## One Endpoint for All Queries

> **Query API** will consolidate all search APIs into a single request. You can now configure a single request to `nearest`/`fusion` search or `discover`/`recommend` or `context`/`order_by` results. Previously, you had to work outside of the API to combine different search requests. Now these approaches are reduced to parameters of a single request, so you can avoid merging individual results.

Reviewer: > `discover`/`recommend` or `context`/`order_by` results

I don't get what these combinations mean.

If it is about re-scoring, then it should be on the hybrid section. For this "One Endpoint for All Queries" title I would expect to list the kinds of queries that this can make, independently of the capabilities of `prefetch`

For example, you can configure Query API to run Discovery search. Let's see how that looks:

```http
POST collections/{collection_name}/points/query
{
  "query": {
    "discover": {
      "target": <vector_input>,
      "context": [{"positive": <vector_input>, "negative": <vector_input>}]
    }
  }
}
```

We will be publishing examples in docs and our new API specification. *For more details, read the [Query API documentation] (/documentation/concepts/query/)*

## Native Hybrid Search Support

> Query API will also natively support **Hybrid Search**. Up to this point, you had to combine the results via `fusion` of `sparse` and `dense` vectors on your own. This is now sorted on the back-end, and you only have to configure them as basic parameters for Query API. 

Reviewer: I think we don't need to use backticks here, since there was no `fusion` action before

```suggestion
Query API will also natively support **Hybrid Search**. Up to this point, you had to fuse the results of sparse and dense searches on your own. This is now sorted on the back-end, and you only have to configure them as basic parameters for Query API. 
```

```http
POST /collections/{collection_name}/points/query
{
    "prefetch": [
        {
            "query": { 
                "indices": [1, 42],    // <┐
                "values": [0.22, 0.8]  // <┴─sparse vector
             },
            "using": "sparse",
            "limit": 20,
        },
        {
            "query": [0.01, 0.45, 0.67, ...], // <-- dense vector
            "using": "dense",
            "limit": 20,
        }
    ],
    "query": { "fusion": "rrf" }, // <--- reciprocal rank fusion
    "limit": 10
}
```

> Keep in mind that the Query API can now perform **sub-requests**. You will need to define a strategy to merge these requests using new parameters. For example, you can now include reranking within Hybrid Search, which can open door to strategies like iterative refinement via matryoshka embeddings. 

Reviewer: "Keep in mind" sounds like a warning note, while this is a feature. Or were you trying to warn against not specifying a `query`?

These vectors will use at least half the memory of regular vectors, which can significantly reduce the footprint of large vector datasets. Operations can be faster due to reduced memory bandwidth requirements and better cache utilization. This can lead to faster vector search operations, especially in memory-bound scenarios.

When creating a collection, you need to specify the `datatype` upfront:
```http
PUT /collections/{collection_name}
{
    "vectors": {
      "size": 1024,
      "distance": "Cosine",
      "datatype": "float16"
    }
}
```
**Storage:** On the backend, we implemented bit packing to minimize the bits needed to store data, crucial for handling sparse vectors in applications like machine learning and data compression. For sparse vectors with mostly zeros, this focuses on storing only the indices and values of non-zero elements. 

You will benefit from a more compact storage and higher processing efficiency. This can also lead to reduced dataset sizes for faster processing and lower storage costs in data compression.

## New Rust Client 

> Qdrant’s reshaped Rust client is now more accessible and easier to use. We have focused on putting together a minimalistic user experience. Its ownership model ensures memory safety without needing a garbage collector, making it ideal for managing intensive computations and large datasets typical of vector databases. Additionally, Rust supports safe concurrent execution, which is crucial for handling multiple simultaneous requests efficiently.

Reviewer 2: > Its ownership model ensures memory safety without needing a garbage collector, making it ideal for managing intensive computations and large datasets typical of vector databases.

In my opinion this sentence is meaningless.

I wrote a change log draft message here, maybe you can source some inspiration from it:
https://github.com/qdrant/rust-client/pull/158#issuecomment-2194725033

<p align="center">

>     <a href="https://github.com/qdrant/rust-client">Rust Client Repo</a> and 

Author: @timvisee Will the links for the docsite be the same?

Reviewer 2: Yes!

- https://docs.rs/qdrant-client

I think it would be nicer to render the `docs.rs` link before the repository, because the new documentation is more interesting.

    snapshots_storage: local
    # s3_config:
    #   bucket: ""
    #   region: ""
    #   access_key: ""
    #   secret_key: ""
```

*Read more about [configuring Qdrant defaults](https://qdrant.tech/documentation/guides/configuration/).*

This integration allows for a more convenient distribution of snapshots. AWS users can now benefit from other platform services, such as automated workflows and disaster recovery options. S3's encryption and access control ensure secure storage and regulatory compliance. Additionally, S3 supports performance optimization through various storage classes and efficient data transfer methods, enabling quick and effective snapshot retrieval and management.

## Issues API 
Issues API reports irregularities in case something isn't operating up to standards. This powerful new feature allows users (such as database admins) to efficiently manage and track issues directly within the system, ensuring smoother operations and quicker resolutions.

You can find the Issues button in the top right. When you click the bell icon, a sidebar will open to show ongoing issues.

![issues api](/blog/qdrant-1.10.x/issues.png)

> ## Optimized Collection Loading 

Author: @timvisee Could you help me out with this section?

tags:
  - vector search
  - ColBERT late interaction
  - BM25 algorithm
  - search API
  - new features
---

[Qdrant 1.10.0 is out!](https://github.com/qdrant/qdrant/releases/tag/v1.10.0) This version introduces at some major changes, so let's dive right in:

**Universal Query API:** All search APIs are now consolidated into a single Query API endpoint.</br>
**Hybrid Search:** Hybrid Search is offered out of the box, and you can use it via Query API.</br>
**BM42 Algorithm:** Alternative method of scoring is best suited for Hybrid Search on short docs.</br>
**Multivector Support:** Native support for late interaction ColBERT is accessible via Query API.

## One Endpoint for All Queries
**Query API** will consolidate all search APIs into a single request. Previously, you had to work outside of the API to combine different search requests. Now these approaches are reduced to parameters of a single request, so you can avoid merging individual results. 

You can now configure the Query API request with the following parameters:

|Parameter|Description|
|-|-|
|no parameter|Returns points by `id`|
|`nearest`|Queries nearest neighbors ([Search](/documentation/concepts/search/))|

> |`fusion`|Fuses sparse/dense prefetch queries ([Hybrid Search](/articles/sparse-vectors/))|

Reviewer: Unless we update the article, this will link to something that isn't the new feature, so let's just link to the documentation :)
```suggestion
|`fusion`|Fuses sparse/dense prefetch queries ([Hybrid Search](/documentation/concepts/hybrid-queries/))|
```

Author: link breaks upon build - ill change before publication

*To learn more about Sub-Requests, read the [Query API documentation](/documentation/concepts/search/).*

## Inverse Document Frequency [IDF]

IDF is a critical component of the **TF-IDF (Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency)** weighting scheme used to evaluate the importance of a word in a document relative to a collection of documents (corpus).
Here is how IDF is calculated:

$$
\text{IDF}(q_i) = \ln \left(\frac{N - n(q_i) + 0.5}{n(q_i) + 0.5}+1\right)
$$

Where:</br>
`N` is the total number of documents in the collection. </br>
`n` is the number of documents containing non-zero values for the given vector.

Due to its relevance to BM25, we decided to move the IDF calculation into the Qdrant engine itself. This type of separation allows streaming updates of the sparse embeddings while keeping the IDF calculation up-to-date.

> This mechanism is relevant when using BM25, but even more so for TFIDF. It previously had to be calculated using all the documents on the client side. However, now that Qdrant does it out of the box, you won't need to implement it anywhere else and recompute the value if some documents are removed or newly added.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The values of IDF previously had to be calculated using all the documents on the client side. However, now that Qdrant does it out of the box, you won't need to implement it anywhere else and recompute the value if some documents are removed or newly added.
```

Actually, BM25 is a tuned TFIDF, not a separate method.

    sparse_vectors={
        "text": models.SparseVectorParams(
            modifier=models.Modifier.IDF,
        ),
    },
)
```

```java
import io.qdrant.client.QdrantClient;
import io.qdrant.client.QdrantGrpcClient;
import io.qdrant.client.grpc.Collections.CreateCollection;
import io.qdrant.client.grpc.Collections.Modifier;
import io.qdrant.client.grpc.Collections.SparseVectorConfig;
import io.qdrant.client.grpc.Collections.SparseVectorParams;

QdrantClient client =
  new QdrantClient(QdrantGrpcClient.newBuilder("localhost", 6334, false).build());

client
  .createCollectionAsync(
    CreateCollection.newBuilder()
    .setCollectionName("{collection_name}")
    .setSparseVectorsConfig(
      SparseVectorConfig.newBuilder()
      .putMap("text", SparseVectorParams.newBuilder().setModifier(Modifier.Idf).build()))
    .build())
  .get();
```

```csharp
using Qdrant.Client;
using Qdrant.Client.Grpc;

var client = new QdrantClient("localhost", 6334);

await client.CreateCollectionAsync(
  collectionName: "{collection_name}",
  sparseVectorsConfig: ("text", new SparseVectorParams {
    Modifier = Modifier.Idf,
  })
);
```

### IDF as Part of BM42

> This quarter, Qdrant also introduced BM42, a novel algorithm that combines the IDF element of BM25 with **transformer-based attention matrices** to improve text retrieval. It utilizes attention matrices from `all-MiniLM-L6-v2` to determine CLS token importance. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This quarter, Qdrant also introduced BM42, a novel algorithm that combines the IDF element of BM25 with transformer-based attention matrices to improve text retrieval. It utilizes attention matrices from your embedding model to determine the importance of each token in the document based on the attention value it receives.

We've prepared the standard `all-MiniLM-L6-v2` Sentence Transformer so [it outputs the attention values](https://huggingface.co/Qdrant/all_miniLM_L6_v2_with_attentions). Still, you can virtually use any model of your choice, given you have access to its parameters. That's another reason to prefer Open Source over proprietary systems!
```

It is not limited to just `all-MiniLM-L6-v2`, but the model has to be prepared to output attention instead of embeddings, and Andrey has just prepared this single one for demo purposes.

In practical terms, the BM42 method addresses the tokenization issues and computational costs associated with SPLADE. The model is both efficient and effective across different document types and lengths, offering enhanced search performance by leveraging the strengths of both BM25 and modern transformer techniques.

> To learn more about IDF and BM42, read our [dedicated technical article].

**You can expect BM42 to excel in scalable RAG-based scenarios where short texts are more common.** Document inference speed is much higher with BM42, which is critical for large-scale applications such as search engines, recommendation systems, and real-time decision-making systems.

> ## ColBERT Multivector Support 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Multivector Support 
```

Reviewer 2: Minor note: I referenced to this header in the Rust client section. If we update it, we should also update the reference.

> We are adding native support for multivector search, compatible with the late-interaction [ColBERT](https://github.com/stanford-futuredata/ColBERT) model. If you are working with high-dimensional similarity searches, **ColBERT is highly recommended as a reranking step in the Universal Query search.** You will experience better quality vector retrieval since ColBERT’s approach  allows for deeper semantic understanding. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We are adding native support for multivector search that is compatible, e.g., with the late-interaction [ColBERT](https://github.com/stanford-futuredata/ColBERT) model. If you are working with high-dimensional similarity searches, **ColBERT is highly recommended as a reranking step in the Universal Query search.** You will experience better quality vector retrieval since ColBERT’s approach allows for deeper semantic understanding. 
```

This model retains contextual information during query-document interaction, leading to better relevance scoring. In terms of efficiency and scalability benefits, documents and queries will be encoded separately, which gives an opportunity for pre-computation and storage of document embeddings for faster retrieval. 

**Note:** *This feature supports all the original quantization compression methods, just the same as the regular search method.* 

**Run a query with ColBERT vectors:**

> The `colbert` parameter is configured via Query API and is compatible with a host of other functionalities. As you can see here, Query API can handle exceedingly complex requests:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Query API can handle exceedingly complex requests. The following example prefetches 1000 entries most similar to the given query using the `mrl_byte` named vector, then reranks them to get the best 100 matches with `full` named vector and eventually reranks them again to extract the top 10 results with the named vector called `colbert`. A single API call can now implement complex reranking schemes.
```

Qdrant does not assume we use a colbert model. `"using": "colbert"` just defines the name of the vector to use.

  query: new float[][] {
    [0.1f, 0.2f], // <─┐
    [0.2f, 0.1f], // < ├─ multi-vector
    [0.8f, 0.9f]  // < ┘
  },
  usingVector: "colbert",
  limit: 10
);
```

**Note:** *The multivector feature is not only useful for ColBERT; it can also be used in other ways.*</br> 
For instance, in e-commerce, you can use multi-vector to store multiple images of the same item. This serves as an alternative to the [group-by](/documentation/concepts/search/#grouping-api) method. 

## Sparse Vectors Compression

In version 1.9, we introduced the `uint8` [vector datatype](/documentation/concepts/collections/#vector-datatypes) for sparse vectors, in order to support pre-quantized embeddings from companies like JinaAI and Cohere. 
This time, we are introducing a new datatype **for both sparse and dense vectors**, as well as a different way of **storing** these  vectors. 

**Datatype:** Sparse and dense vectors were previously represented in larger `float32` values, but now they can be turned to the `float16`. `float16` vectors have a lower precision compared to `float32`, which means that there is less numerical accuracy in the vector values - but this is negligible for practical use cases. 

> These vectors will use at least half the memory of regular vectors, which can significantly reduce the footprint of large vector datasets. Operations can be faster due to reduced memory bandwidth requirements and better cache utilization. This can lead to faster vector search operations, especially in memory-bound scenarios.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These vectors will use half the memory of regular vectors, which can significantly reduce the footprint of large vector datasets. Operations can be faster due to reduced memory bandwidth requirements and better cache utilization. This can lead to faster vector search operations, especially in memory-bound scenarios.
```

This is exactly half the memory of `float32` vectors.

    <a href="https://docs.rs/qdrant-client">Client Documentation</a>
</p>

## S3 Snapshot Storage
Qdrant **Collections**, **Shards** and **Storage** can be backed up with [Snapshots](/documentation/concepts/snapshots/) and saved in case of data loss or other data transfer purposes. These snapshots can be quite large and the resources required to maintain them can result in higher costs. [AWS S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/) is a great low-cost alternative that can hold snapshots without incurring high costs. It is globally reliable, scalable and resistant to data loss. 

You can configure S3 bucket settings in the [config.yaml](https://github.com/qdrant/qdrant/blob/master/config/config.yaml), specifically under`snapshots_storage`.

```yaml
storage:
  # Where to store all the data
  storage_path: ./storage

  # Where to store snapshots
  snapshots_path: ./snapshots

  snapshots_config:
    # "local" or "s3" - where to store snapshots
    snapshots_storage: local
    # s3_config:
    #   bucket: ""
    #   region: ""
    #   access_key: ""
    #   secret_key: ""
```

*Read more about [configuring Qdrant defaults](https://qdrant.tech/documentation/guides/configuration/).*

> This integration allows for a more convenient distribution of snapshots. AWS users can now benefit from other platform services, such as automated workflows and disaster recovery options. S3's encryption and access control ensure secure storage and regulatory compliance. Additionally, S3 supports performance optimization through various storage classes and efficient data transfer methods, enabling quick and effective snapshot retrieval and management.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This integration allows for a more convenient distribution of snapshots. Users of any S3-compatible object storage can now benefit from other platform services, such as automated workflows and disaster recovery options. S3's encryption and access control ensure secure storage and regulatory compliance. Additionally, S3 supports performance optimization through various storage classes and efficient data transfer methods, enabling quick and effective snapshot retrieval and management.
```

      .setLimit(20)
      .build())
    .addPrefetch(PrefetchQuery.newBuilder()
      .setQuery(nearest(List.of(0.01f, 0.45f, 0.67f)))
      .setUsing("dense")
      .setLimit(20)
      .build())
    .setQuery(fusion(Fusion.RRF))
    .build())
  .get();
```

```csharp
using Qdrant.Client;
using Qdrant.Client.Grpc;

var client = new QdrantClient("localhost", 6334);

await client.QueryAsync(
  collectionName: "{collection_name}",
  prefetch: new List < PrefetchQuery > {
    new() {
      Query = new(float, uint)[] {
          (0.22f, 1), (0.8f, 42),
        },
        Using = "sparse",
        Limit = 20
    },
    new() {
      Query = new float[] {
          0.01f, 0.45f, 0.67f
        },
        Using = "dense",
        Limit = 20
    }
  },
  query: Fusion.Rrf
);
```

### Sub-Requests
Query API can now perform sub-requests, which means you can run queries sequentially within the same API call. There are a lot of options here, so you will need to define a strategy to merge these requests using new parameters. For example, you can now include **rescoring within Hybrid Search**, which can open the door to strategies like iterative refinement via matryoshka embeddings. 

> *To learn more about Sub-Requests, read the [Query API documentation](/documentation/concepts/search/).*

Reviewer 2: I don't think we want to call this 'sub queries'. We should probably stick with 'hybrid search' and `prefetch'. I'd suggest to combine this one with the above section.

cc @generall
